What is Git?
Git is a version control system that allows you to track changes to files and coordinate work on those files among multiple people. It is commonly used for software development, but it can be used to track changes to any set of files.

With Git, you can keep a record of who made changes to what part of a file, and you can revert back to earlier versions of the file if needed. Git also makes it easy to collaborate with others, as you can share changes and merge the changes made by different people into a single version of a file.

What is GitHub?
GitHub is a web-based platform that provides hosting for version control using Git. It is a subsidiary of Microsoft, and it offers all of the distributed version control and source code management (SCM) functionality of Git as well as adding its own features. GitHub is a very popular platform for developers to share and collaborate on projects, and it is also used for hosting open-source projects.

What is Version Control? How many types of version controls do we have?
Version control is a system that tracks changes to a file or set of files over time so that you can recall specific versions later. It allows you to revert files back to a previous state, revert the entire project back to a previous state, compare changes over time, see who last modified something that might be causing a problem, who introduced an issue and when, and more.

There are two main types of version control systems: centralized version control systems and distributed version control systems.

A centralized version control system (CVCS) uses a central server to store all the versions of a project's files. Developers "check out" files from the central server, make changes, and then "check in" the updated files. Examples of CVCS include Subversion and Perforce.

A distributed version control system (DVCS) allows developers to "clone" an entire repository, including the entire version history of the project. This means that they have a complete local copy of the repository, including all branches and past versions. Developers can work independently and then later merge their changes back into the main repository. Examples of DVCS include Git, Mercurial, and Darcs.

Why do we use distributed version control over centralized version control?
Better collaboration: In a DVCS, every developer has a full copy of the repository, including the entire history of all changes. This makes it easier for developers to work together, as they don't have to constantly communicate with a central server to commit their changes or to see the changes made by others.

Improved speed: Because developers have a local copy of the repository, they can commit their changes and perform other version control actions faster, as they don't have to communicate with a central server.

Greater flexibility: With a DVCS, developers can work offline and commit their changes later when they do have an internet connection. They can also choose to share their changes with only a subset of the team, rather than pushing all of their changes to a central server.

Enhanced security: In a DVCS, the repository history is stored on multiple servers and computers, which makes it more resistant to data loss. If the central server in a CVCS goes down or the repository becomes corrupted, it can be difficult to recover the lost data.

Tasks ✅:
Create a new repository on GitHub and clone it to your local machine
Create a new repository and give it a name. You can select if you want your repository to be public or private.



Click on Create Repository. This will create a new repository named gitrepoday8.



To clone this repository, first copy the https link.



The command used for cloning the repository is ' git clone'. This will create a new folder named gitrepoday8 which is the name of your GitHub repository.



Make some changes to a file in the repository and commit them to the repository using Git
Go to the folder where you cloned the repository.

Create a new folder. We created a new text file using the touch command. After that, we will check the status of that file using 'git status'.



Here, we can see that the file is untracked. To track the file we will use the below command:

git add .



Now check the git status. The file has been added staging area from the working directory. Working Directory --> Staging area.

Now next step will be to commit the file. To commit the file we use the below command.

git commit -m "type your commit message here"



Now if you check the git status, you can see there's nothing to commit.

Push the changes back to the repository on GitHub.
To do so, we will use the below command

git push origin main

Here, the main is the branch name.



You can see, that a new file has been added to GitHub

